---
layout: partial
title:  "What is House Bill 11?"
---

This bill bans trans-girls from competing in school sports on the girl's teams.

The primary sponsor, Kera Birkeland, argues "it preserves the integrity of women’s sports."  

Line 209:
"A student of the male sex may not compete, and a public school or LEA may not allow a student of the male sex to compete, with a team designated for students of the female sex in an interscholastic athletic activity."

The bill also has provisions in place to ensure that if the ban is invalidated in court that a commission would be established to screen transgender students on an individual basis.

Houes bill 11 was vetoed by Govenor Cox who criticised the bill because the ban on transgirls in sports was a last minute ammendment that completely changed the bill without any public input. 

Republican Governor Spencer J. Cox [wrote a statement](https://governor.utah.gov/2022/03/24/gov-cox-why-im-vetoing-hb11/) after vetoing this bill in it's final state. He condemned it for being fear mongering that harms an extremely small number of vulnerable students.

"Here are the numbers that have most impacted my [veto]: 75,000, 4, 1, 86 and 56.
- 75,000 high school kids participating in high school sports in Utah.
- 4 transgender kids playing high school sports in Utah.
- 1 transgender student playing girls sports.
- 86% of trans youth reporting suicidality.
- 56% of trans youth having attempted suicide.
Four kids and only one of them playing girls sports. That’s what all of this is about. Four kids who aren’t dominating or winning trophies or taking scholarships. Four kids who are just trying to find some friends and feel like they are a part of something. Four kids trying to get through each day."

This bill's veto was overturned and went into effect on the 1st of July 2022.