---
layout: partial
title:  "What is House Bill 329?"
---

House bill 329 was a bill that required that sufficient notice be provided to parents so they can avoid any "Event with an adult theme."

An "event with an adult theme" is any event that:
- Contains content that may not be appropriate for children.
- Takes place in a public building or on public grounds.

## In Brief.

This bill would allow a city to place prominent warnings that a public event may not be suitable for children at their discretion.

Critics of this bill consider it to be an anti-trans bill but more specifically an anti LGBTQ bill. Some argue the bill was drafted in order to allow St. George, and other cities should they choose, to label drag performances as not appropriate for children and place public warnings for all drag shows. 

Drag has become a major part of LGBTQ representation and critics argue the bill would label even nonsexual family oriented events as unfit for children. This if true would place a clear stain on trans community which is espeially linked with drag performance.

This bill passed the house (55-14) but the legislative session ended before it could be seen in the senate.


## Detailed Explanation.

The reason this bill is considered an anti-trans bill is a bit nuanced. It does not specifically outline any lgbtq related topics to be affected. Critics point to the when and why of the bill to illustrate the potential effect.

This bill was drafted in response to a publicly held drag show that occurred on June 3rd of 2022 at 9pm in St. George, Utah. Both of the primary sponsors for this bill have part of the St. George metro area as part of their district. One of the primary sponsors, Rep. Colin W. Jack, [admitted in an interview](https://www.fox13now.com/news/local-news/after-drag-show-controversy-bill-calls-for-warning-labels-for-events-with-adult-content) that this bill was drafted in response to the drag show held that day.

This show was performed in St. George's Town Square for the HBO series "We're Here" and caused a significant political storm in the community. Prior to the event being held [city council members attempted to void their permit](https://www.ksl.com/article/50507507/texts-highlight-drag-show-debate-that-led-to-st-george-city-managers-resignation) and [held a hearing taking public comment on the event the day prior to the show taking place.](https://www.thespectrum.com/story/news/2022/06/02/lgbtq-residents-allies-plead-st-george-over-hbo-drag-show/7473157001/)

Some members of the community felt that all drag shows are inherently sexual, and thus unfit for children. This is what this bill set out to address, perception from some members of the community that content they view as sexual is being performed in a public venue without warning or notice.

Critics argue that this bill would have been used to label events with drag as adult themed or potentially unfit for children through the mouth of public office. Opponents argue what's considered unfit for children is subjective and will be used to label and condemn events.

Drag is considered inexorably linked with transgender people in our culture, the show itself featuring two trans performers. And to label a performance that is neither sexual nor profane as unfit for children is what critics oppose. When these two things are linked, to label one as unfit for children implies the same for the other.

## Additional Notes:
- [St. George forced the resignation of the official who greenlit the event costing a $600,000 settlement.](https://kslnewsradio.com/1978282/canceling-drag-show-will-cost-st-george-taxpayers-600000/)
- [St. George in 2023 revoked a drag event's permit on dubious grounds and then lost in court over their censoring.](https://www.stgeorgeutah.com/news/archive/2023/06/29/mgk-st-george-will-not-appeal-judges-order-allowing-drag-show/)
