---
layout: partial
title:  "What is House Bill 316?"
---

House Bill 316 is a bill that puts into law what conditions must be met in order for a trans inmate to be moved to a facility that aligns with their gender identity.

The requirements are that a safety screening must be conducted by the prison based on the following checks:
- The inmate's anatomy.
- The physical characteristics of the inmate.
- The transgender inmate's ciminal history including predatory behaviour towards the opposite sex.
- The history of the inmate while in custody.
- The likelihood of them causing harm to the facility they request to be moved to.
- The safety of the staff if a transgender inmate were to be assigned to the facility.
- An analysis of whether the inmate has a history or pattern of any of the following:
    - Anti-social attitudes or behaviors.
    - Interacting with peers who display anti-social attitudes or behaviors.
    - Negative family issues or influence.
    - A lack of achievement in education or employment.
    - Not participating in pro-leisure activities.
    - Substance abuse.
- Whether the new facility would ensure the inmate's safety and assist their rehabilitation.
- Any other factor determined to be relevant by the executive director or a county sheriff.

While proponents of this bill foucs on how this bill sets up a legal basis for transferring transgender inmates to their preferred housing; the extremely broad requirements essentially tell prison staff to use whatever discretion they choose. Which is already the case.

Additionally while it's reasonable that predatory inmates are not housed with their victims, the requirement of not having been predatory towards the opposite sex raises further questions. Such as whether inmates who are predatory towards the same sex should be housed in opposite sex facilities as well. 

Crititcs oppose this bill because it does not grant any additional rights to transgender people and used part of Utah's extremely limited legislative session to pass a bill based on the idea that transgender people are predatory.

This bill was signed into law goes into effect May 1st, 2024.