---
layout: post
title:  "An argument against Utah's recent \"Equality Bill\" (H.B. 257)"
date:   2024-04-17 14:10:11 -0600
categories: opinion
preview_image: "bathroom.jpg"
description: "House Bill 257 passed this legislative session and was met with substantial outcry from the LGBTQ community. But even with the concessions made, why might one still oppose it? Why is \"the most middle of the road\" bill of it's kind, still so hated?"
---

January 19th, 2024, only four days into Utah’s legislative session and the halls of the Utah State Capitol were already struggling. After more than 9 months since the last time they convened, the state legislature was already strapped for time in their blisteringly short 45 day session. Stuck at the heart of this is the current bill on the agenda, House Bill 257, “Sex-based Designations for Privacy, Anti-bullying, and Women's Opportunities.” Among the representatives on the house floor some champion the bill for its potential to ensure equal accommodations in public school activities for men and women, as well as argue it brings peace of mind to survivors of sexual abuse. Others on the floor decry it for bringing undue scrutiny and potential criminal punishment to transgender people in their daily life. With the house divided and one representative left in tears after finishing her statement; Representative Kera Birkeland, the primary sponsor for H.B. 257, was given the final opportunity to speak before her bill was taken to a vote.

"As I drove into the capitol this morning a song that I love came on,”said Rep. Birkeland, “It's come as you are. And I thought- I just cried. I cried because I've taken an issue that I know can be polarizing. And I've tried, as it was mentioned; no conservative think tank, or national group that espouses conservative ideals, will support it. Because it takes such a middle of the road approach. It gives too much, many of them said.”[Rep. Kera Birkeland Primary Sponsor](https://le.utah.gov/av/videoClip.jsp?meetingType=floor&stream=https://stream1.utleg.gov/vodhouse/smil:rHVID_156_011924_01.smil/playlist.m3u8&offset=6493&endTime=6698) This sentiment is echoed through Representative Birkeland's and her supporter’s statements. The sentiment that despite the outcry “this bill doesn’t target people.” That it still carefully considers those affected by it and is a measured action taken directly to “target predators.” Frankly, this is not true. While the final bill that has been signed into law and goes into effect on May 1st, 2024 is significantly better than the original draft, it still places unnecessary and arbitrary restrictions which almost exclusively affect transgender individuals.

H.B. 257's call to fame has been owed to it's label by critics as a "bathroom bill." A category of legislation aimed at restricting what facilities transgender people have access to, especially public restrooms. Beyond the initial restriction on bathrooms, this bill originally required that any individual who entered a "sex-designated privacy space" must have a birth certificate with a gender marker matching the space, if the marker was amended then documentation of a "primary sex characteristic surgical procedure" is necessary as well. These "sex-designated privacy spaces" would include restrooms, changing rooms, as well as crisis centers for rape, domestic abuse, and emergency shelters. If these rules were broken and it's determined that a reasonable person would take offense to the defendant's presence then they would be sentenced to criminal trespass, a class B misdemeanor carrying up to 6 months in prison and a fine of $1,000. The bill in it's final form now only carries criminal penalties for changing rooms in any partially government owned facility such as those in public colleges or public recreation centers.

With the restrictions on bathrooms and crisis centers removed, lawmakers implicitly agree that it was not strictly necessary to impose these restrictions. As representative Brian King said in his statement opposing the bill, "Things like voyeurism. Things like, lewdness, public indecency, sexual assault. Those are already crimes, they're on the books."[Rep. Brian S. King Opposing the bill.](https://le.utah.gov/av/videoClip.jsp?meetingType=floor&stream=https://stream1.utleg.gov/vodhouse/smil:rHVID_156_011924_01.smil/playlist.m3u8&offset=5622&endTime=5878) So why is it that changing rooms are considered any different? If the individual in question hasn't caused any direct harm to another person then why should they be given a criminal court case leading to potential prison time. On February 15th, 2024 Governor Cox signed H.C.R. 18 which was unanimously passed in the legislature and titled, "Condemning and Censuring State School Board Member Natalie Cline." The incident that led to her condemnation was a social media post implying that a high school girl's basketball player was transgender, the only evidence she provided was pictures of the athlete. Her followers then proceeded to harass the player and her family as well as publicly disclose their personal information. In a statement responding to the incident Equality Utah stated, "Cline’s post perpetuates a modern day witch-hunt, where hysterical adults police the bodies of children to determine if they are masculine or feminine enough."[Equality Utah's Post on the post that led to her censure.](https://twitter.com/EqualityUtah/status/1755348886200422411)While it's great that Utah legislature were swift in making clear that Mrs. Cline's actions are unpalatable, this story clearly illustrates the presence of those who are actively calling others' sex into question. This is one major criticism of the law, people are not nearly as accurate at determining another person's sex as they believe and H.B. 257 encourages this sex policing behavior. If the major concern addressed by the law is the perception of the opposite sex within a "sex-designated space" then that is inherently flawed. Assuming the legal part for determining whether they were allowed in the changing room isn't flawed then the end result of this part of the law would be both trans and cis individuals being harassed by people who believe they don't belong in that space.

Though that would assume that the law will properly decide who's allowed in changing rooms to begin with. Representative Cheryl K. Acton in favor of this bill stated, "Another thing that I really like about the bill is that a fully transitioned individual has full access to the facilities of their chosen or secondary gender." This idea of a "fully transitioned" individual, while not explicitly stated in the law, is echoed in the law and is a fundamental misconception. Current practice in transgender healthcare, "focuses on
dysphoria as the clinical problem, not identity per se."[DSM 5 TR p. 514](https://www.mredscircleoftrust.com/storage/app/media/DSM%205%20TR.pdf#page=714) Someone who is transgender is recommended to only get the treatments that they feel are necessary. Transgender healthcare is to focus on addressing their discomfort, not on correcting any perceived difference from the general public. This law expects that receiving a "primary sex characteristic surgical procedure," what's commonly called bottom surgery, is a natural desired outcome for all transgender men and woman. However, this is not the case. According to the [2015 US Transgender Survey](https://transequality.org/sites/default/files/docs/usts/USTS-Full-Report-Dec17.pdf) roughly two thirds of transgender men and women had either received or answered positively when asked about the most common bottom surgery for their demographic. Only about a third have received any kind of gender affirming surgery ([2022 KFF/Washington Post Trans Survey](https://files.kff.org/attachment/REPORT-KFF-The-Washington-Post-Trans-Survey.pdf)) and only a further third had received gender affirming surgery relating to their genitals ([National Estimates of Gender Affirming Surgeries in the US](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2808707)). Meaning that by current estimates only somewhere around 10% of transgender men and women have received one of the surgeries required by law, and of those who haven't a significant number never intend to. Additionally, assuming that the rationale behind this requirement was to ensure that the individual's genitals visually matched what's expected of the facility, this requirement fails at that. Five of the nine surgeries mentioned under the law either leave no visual difference or leave their genitals still visibly those of their sex assigned at birth while rendering the patient sterile. The law also specifically outlines procedures "that would result in the sterilization of an individual who is not sterile" for the purpose of gender affirming surgery.  That the law is effectively requiring transgender people to be sterilized in order to use a changing room is highly questionable. Neither of the two most common forms of bottom surgery, hysterectomies and orchiectomies, ensure the genitals visually match those expected within the given changing room. The additional qualifier of bottom surgery is entirely unnecessary considering the birth certificate requirement. It exclusively targets transgender individuals for a nonexistent problem. This is especially concerning since bottom surgeries are costly and invasive procedures that a significant number of transgender people don't want 
or need and the vast majority have not received.

But what's been outlined in this article isn't even half of what H.B. 257 will impact when it goes into effect on May 1st, 2024. The restrictions to changing rooms apply to all "sex-designated privacy spaces" for K-12 students at school with the punishment for using a different restroom to be handled by the school system in a similar manner, but not necessarily severity, as a fight on school grounds. In other words Children at school will not face criminal charges but may face other disciplinary measures at the school's discretion for using a bathroom that does not align with their sex assigned at birth. What proponents of the bill claim to claim to love about the bill is that it establishes further protections and enforcement for Title XI. A government body will be setup in order to impose fines of up to $10,000 per day after a 30 day grace period upon schools which don't uphold equal funding to activities across the sexes. However, this same body will also impose fines for a number of violations including knowingly allowing members of differing sex to use the same "sex-designated facility" in the presence of one another and "requiring males or females to participate or compete against the opposite sex in any sex-designated facility, program, or event." Not only does this bar transgender students from using their preferred bathroom at a state wide level it also will fine the schools that do not enforce this requirement as well as fine schools that let transgender people participate in gendered events without giving their opponent the right to refuse competing with them. 

In January the Salt Lake Tribune interviewed a local high school student and trans woman named faith who spoke in opposition to the bill. Faith spoke that the restrictions imposed by the bill would negatively affect students like her and her worries for those who might not be as resilient as her. Specifically that it may endanger other transgender students by forcing their identity to be known. "I don’t want that to happen to other people,” Faith told committee members. “I’m fine with it because I learned to have tough skin. But there are people who are not really in the best mental state, and getting bullied because someone found out you’re trans is not going to be the best thing.” The article additionally goes on to state that she's required to use a single occupancy restroom in the nurse's office which can be a quarter-mile walk for her at school causing her to miss some of her classes. Such privacy policies will now be required that should a student wish to use a bathroom that doesn't match their sex assigned at birth they'd have to be provided with a single occupancy or mixed facility. Considering the dominant focus of gender specific accommodations in large public facilities such as schools this would leave transgender students to receive measurably worse treatment as a result of the law. Although the law requires buildings to either be retrofitted with mixed or single use facilities this isn't available in all scenarios, not all buildings can be remodeled to have such facilities nor are exterior ones of equal quality. Not to mention that these restrictions have dubious merit especially considering the restrictions on bathrooms were lifted everywhere except public schools.

Whether H.B. 257 will hold up when it goes into affect May 1st, 2024 and what affect it will have is still to be determined but this law others transgender people and shows that the legislature of Utah views them as a point of concern for public safety. In her closing statement Kera Birkeland, the primary sponsor for H.B. 257, stated, "So please, please support passing something that sends a message to the rest of the nation that Utah knows how to be compassionate, but Utah knows where to draw the line." But for a law that provides little to no additional utility in prosecuting potential sex criminals it fear mongers about and is praised for it's reinforcements to Title IX while all but ensuring transgender students receive worse accommodations to be considered "compassionate" seems foolish. This law does clearly send a message to the nation, regardless of whether they've caused any direct harm to anyone; transgender people are predatory and the nation is justified to be concerned. To quote Oklahoma state senator Tom Woods who spoke in response to a nonbinary student who killed themself in response to bullying they had received at school, "We don't want that filth in our state." Utah state legislature is certainly better than Oklahoma in the sense that it prefers to appear compassionate but this bill can't be considered anything such. Contrary to Rep. Birkeland's words, this bill is callous, and this bill unfairly targets an already marginalized group in our society. Bills such as H.B. 257 cannot be accepted in our country, and they absolutely cannot be accepted in Utah. 