---
layout: post
title:  "Brittney Nystrom, an advocate for Utahns."
date:   2024-04-15 14:00:11 -0600
categories: profile
preview_image: "brittney-nystrom.jpg"
description: "With the onslaught of legislation on LGBTQ rights across the nation, a strong defender is desperately needed. Find out who's steering the ship at the ACLU of Utah and fighting for you in the background."
---

With deep eye bags like canyons and short, frizzy hair often kept up in a slightly messy  bun, Brittney Nystrom gives off the impression of a woman with hardly a second to spare. And while many people may be strapped for time, the reason she’s so busy is what truly sets her apart. Because as the current Executive Director of the ACLU of Utah, Brittney Nystrom has been a staunch advocate for the rights of those around her for nearly two decades. She has been across the country testifying and leading policy advocating for people’s rights and fighting for their freedoms as an expert on immigration. And since 2016 has been back home in her birth state of Utah to ensure the fair treatment of those living here as well.

According to an interview Done by the Standard Examiner her journey truly began while volunteering for the AmeriCorps in Wisconsin stating, “At that time, welfare reform was all the rage, and I was in a community of low-income African-American moms. What really struck me were the barriers to success facing that community. A lot of my clients would apply for a job, get hired and then terminated due to an old criminal conviction on their record. That was my first exposure to the obstacles people face in just trying to survive.” Her experience there deeply resonated with her, leading her to go through law school so she could combat the injustices she saw first hand. This decision led to more than a decade of policy and advocacy work specifically to benefit immigrants and refugees who shared some of the struggles she witnessed firsthand.

Beyond that, Nystrom is community oriented. She began her journey in response to what she witnessed in Wisconsin and later took upon the role of Executive Director for the ACLU of Utah with Utahns specifically in mind stating, “There is a lot of opportunity for progress, because Utahns tend to be practical but compassionate and recognize the humanity of their fellow Utahns. That positions the ACLU to be able to work with various stakeholders on reforms to criminal justice, racial justice, immigrant rights, even the rights of the community to be involved in the democratic process. (Standard Examiner)” As a Utah local she trusts Utahn’s ability to empathize with one another and thinks that is instrumental to defend the rights of others. She’s someone who took up the role of Executive Director with respect for Utah’s ability to hold a dialogue.

That being said, that doesn’t mean everything’s perfect and a lot has changed in Utah since she assumed the role in 2016. Specifically in respect to LBTQ+ rights the climate across the nation and in Utah by extension has changed significantly with each year since 2020 having a record number of anti-trans legislation introduced in the United States. In 2023 the LGBTQ+ advocacy group the Human Rights Campaign put out a statement stating, “Today, the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) — the nation’s largest lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ+) civil rights organization — officially declared a state of emergency for LGBTQ+ people in the United States for the first time in its more than 40-year history, following an unprecedented and dangerous spike in anti-LGBTQ+ legislative assaults sweeping state houses this year.” The statement was put out in response to a rapid rise in anti-LBTQ+ laws with hundreds proposed and according to the press statement over 75 laws passed in 2023 alone. In both 2022 and 2023 Mrs. Nystrom appeared on ABC4 where she was questioned on the issue of trans rights. In 2022 she stated, “Singling out transgender athletes for discrimination violates constitutional protections. And it risks causing emotional or mental harm to those athletes as well. We really don’t want to see a de facto ban (on transgender athletes competing in sports) by committee. We also are concerned about student athletes being subjected to invasive measurements or some kind of inspection before they compete. (ABC4)” This statement was made in response to a bill that banned trans girls from competing in girls sports at the school level. The ACLU of Utah put out a further statement saying. “It treats transgender children as outcasts and sends the dangerous message that it is okay to reject and exclude people because of who they are.” This bill was vetoed by Governor Cox but the veto was overridden. In 2023 when invited back she spoke to three different bills proposed targeting trans youth, two of which are now signed into law.

Just one month ago at the time of writing on January 30th, 2023 she wrote a letter on behalf of the ACLU of Utah to governor cox on another piece of anti-trans legislation. This bill, H.B. 257, changes law to be able to apply criminal trespass charges to anyone who uses a public restroom facility that does not correspond with their birth sex or birth certificate. Mrs. Nystrom states that this bill, “[imposes] unduly restrictive rules on accessing facilities and programs based on a person’s sex designated at birth, the bill disrupts the ability of individuals and communities to live their lives as valued members of society fully and publicly.” Additionally for those concerned with sexual violence in restrooms the bill does nothing to address that, Nystrom writes, “Utah law already provides criminal penalties for harassment and assault in restrooms and public spaces… All it does is invite scrutiny of people who are transgender or perceived to be transgender when they are lawfully going about their lives.” This bill has now been signed into law with Governor Cox’s approval and with the ACLU insinuating it to be unconstitutional, Brittney Nystrom will likely make moves to fight it in the courts.

While Brittney Nystrom may have had a long journey getting here to Utah moving from immigration reforms in D.C. to the head of the ACLU of Utah, she certainly still has her work cut out for her. Whether it’s for LGBTQ+ rights or immigration reform we’re lucky she’ll still be there fighting.